HERE WAS A time before we knew each other but I can’t remember what that was like.

Once a fortnight we get together at their place or ours—it’s theirs tonight–—to drink and unwind. The drinking is like a current that carries us all happily along. There’s no pretence between us anymore, we’ve known each other too long. Once in a while we argue, but nothing sticks. I’m not sure if any of us are the forgiving type, except Martin, maybe, but all the gin means forgetting is pretty much assured.

We’ve barely finished our first drinks before Martin asks me if I’m OK. ‘You’re very quiet,’ he says, in a way that suggests he’s expecting a witty reply. But, for a moment, I have no response. I feel unsettled. Everything should be different tonight, but nothing is. Amy is behaving as though nothing has happened, except that, when Laura and I arrived, she didn’t really say hello, and she’s barely spoken to me since we sat down. So, as I pause, lost in my thoughts, it’s Laura that answers Martin on my behalf, ‘Term started this week. He’s cheesed-off already.’

I wonder if Martin knows. Did Amy tell him? It’s been four days; easily enough time for her to think things over and confess—although she was never one for confessions.

Tonight, there is one other guest: one of Amy’s colleagues. Sometimes, “outsiders” come along to our gatherings, although it’s usually just the four of us left by the end of the night. Martin introduces him but I’m watching Amy, looking for any sign of a connection between them, so I forget his name almost instantly, meaning I’ll spend the rest of the evening calling him Buddy.

I wonder if it was him I’d seen with her. I don’t recognise him, but I hadn’t expected to. When I’d arrived, the front door was ajar, as though someone was in the process of leaving the house so I waited for a moment. If the door hadn’t already been open, I wouldn’t have gone in, but when no one came out, I walked up the steps and pushed the door open and drew a breath, ready to announce my arrival. After the glare of the morning sun, the hallway was dark and it took a moment for me to organise the shadows into the shape of two figures, pressed together against the wall.

I try to resolve the picture in my mind, as though by concentrating I can turn up the lighting, sharpen the focus, but the image is just a blur. It might have been Buddy, the hair and build are about right, but both could be described as ‘average’. There’s no sign of recognition from him that might tip me off, but that’s to be expected—I doubt he even noticed me in the moment before Amy saw me and looked away, forcing her skirt down, and leading him further into the house. If he’d noticed me at all, I would’ve appeared only as a partial silhouette in the bright oblong of the half-open doorway.

I remember there had been a van parked outside when got there, but Buddy doesn’t seem like a man who drives a van. Just to be sure, when I go to fix more drinks, I take the opportunity to peep out of the front window. I see a two-seater Mercedes in the drive and feel more at ease.

I’m pulled back into the conversation by Buddy’s voice.

‘What a lovely garden.’

While I was distracted, the others have started to move outside to take advantage of the unseasonably warm evening. From the patio Amy says, ‘Yes, we like it.’

It isn’t especially lovely. Amy and Martin’s garden is almost identical to ours: a pond, an ornamental concrete sundial, and a lawn bordered at the far end by the poplars that form the border of the estate. Most of the trees have shed their leaves already, but, unlike our garden, there are none on the ground or in the pond. The lawn has been raked and cut, the borders tended. Everything is neat, but bleakly so—the product of the attentive but disinterested hand of a hired contractor. Amy’s friend with the van, maybe? Too busy indoors to be creative outdoors.

The main difference between their garden and ours is that theirs isn’t overlooked by the flats. The flats are neat and modern, well built and well maintained, but ever since we moved in, I resented them. Their shadow makes our garden a little darker than theirs, the lawn more threadbare. I grew up in flats, and these remind me that I’d elbowed my way into our high-achievers’ ghetto. I worked hard, kissed arse, climbed. I suppose all of us had. Only Martin had been different. He’s a doctor’s son. He read Classics at Oxford, for all the good it did him—he ended up running a high-end wine-seller which we are not, under any circumstance, allowed to refer to as an off-license. Not that you’d know we’re invaders; our accents and manners, our wardrobe, even our tastes, have changed. Maybe it’s the same for everyone here. Maybe we’re all hiding a fear that we don’t belong behind our manicured hedges and waxed BMWs.

When Amy offers me a cigarette, I feel Laura watching and decline.

‘Go on, you know you want one,’ Amy says.

I take one and she lights it for me. Her eyes shine briefly in the glow of the flame.

‘He only smokes when he’s with you two, you know.’ Laura is getting spikey. The others pick up on it and there’s a pause. Trying to fill the gap, Buddy asks what I do for a living and, putting her hand on my arm for emphasis, Laura says, ‘Get him to tell you about his new paper. It’s riveting.’

‘Go on, tell us about it,’ Amy laughs.

I go with it. ‘Actually, I’m glad you asked. It is very interesti— ’

‘It’s something about rust,’ Laura cuts me off.

‘It’s about metal fatigue and oxidisation—corrosion.’

‘He sits in a little room with his undergraduates or a doe-eyed PhD, and watches things rust until they fall apart, don’t you, John?’

They’re waiting for my witty comeback. Something slightly bitchy, but charming too, so we can all laugh together, but I stay quiet.

Finally, Martin begins one of his elaborate jokes. I take the opportunity to go to the bathroom, and he pauses mid-line. ‘Where are you going? You’ll like this one, it’s funny as fuck.’

‘Piss.’

‘Well, be a love and bring some ice back with you,’ he shouts after me.

Upstairs, I turn on the bathroom light. Outside, they will see the glow through the blind and the swirled pattern of the glass. I don’t go in. Instead, I cross the landing to the door of Amy and Martin’s room and push it open, allowing light to spill in.

On the opposite side of the room is the bed—king-sized, unmade. It is strewn, like the floor, with discarded clothes. I study her side of the room where the mess of books and objects on the nightstand continues onto her dressing table where bottles, jars, and hairbrushes are scattered. The air feels undisturbed, as though the room hasn’t been used for days. It carries the faint smells of perfume, cosmetics, and sleep, simultaneously familiar and foreign. I weigh all this from my place, just inside the door.

A lifetime ago, I had a thing for Amy, but she correctly pointed out, years later, that if she had gone out with me—I flatter myself that she did actually consider it—she would’ve crushed my crappy little heart like an eggshell—her words, not mine. She was right of course. My persistence in the face of repeated rejections won me the lesser role of ‘friend’, so I had a front-row seat as she crushed the hearts of others. By the time Martin arrived in her life I was already going out with Laura, and the four of us became friends.

If things had worked out differently, it might have been me married to Amy. Perhaps Martin might have married Laura, who knows. Although, I think she’d have found him a little lightweight. Once you scratch through the veneer, there isn’t a lot behind it. I remember how I caught him once, practicing his smile in front of mirror.

When we were young he fancied himself. He still does. I suppose, other than the tobacco staining that emphasises the gaps between his teeth, he’s looking pretty good. He’s not as thin as he was, but we all still think of him as the athletic one—our perception of him lagging behind the reality. I admit he carries it well, and I admire his self-confidence now as much as I did back then. It’s misplaced, but perhaps all the more admirable for it.

I go back downstairs. In the hallway, I pause next to the painting I’d seen pushed askew by Amy’s shoulder, straightened now, and I look along the passageway to the front door, imagining myself standing there, framed in the sunlight. The doorway is only a few meters away but when I’d stood there watching them, the corridor had seemed so long that they’d seemed a great distance away.

By the time I get back to the table with the ice, the conversation has taken a turn. I see that Buddy has gone, and Laura, Amy and Martin are chatting quietly. ‘He said to tell you goodbye,’ Laura tells me disinterestedly. As I take my seat again, I wonder if I’ve missed an argument. For a moment they seem like strangers and I’m a little weirded out so I pour myself another large gin.

We sit in silence for a while, looking out across the dark lawn, each of us trying a little too hard to appreciate the moment. The sounds of a distant party drifts through the evening—people younger than us having fun. Martin stands up and for a minute I think he’s about to make an announcement. I feel a pang of anxiety as I wonder if he knows about what happened, if he knows I know, and if he blames me for holding my silence, but he rubs his hands together, smiling. ‘I know what we need.’

He goes inside and throws open the lounge windows. Behind the half-closed curtain, we see his shadow as he puts on a record; dance tunes from our clubbing days. As the music kicks in, Amy jumps up, stumbling slightly, almost knocking over her glass, and grabs my hand, ‘Come on, dance with me.’ I get up, of course. As soon as we start dancing, I catch her eye and, for a second, I see her again, frozen in the half-light of the hallway, her lips parted and a look in her eyes that, a lifetime ago, I had pictured a thousand times. Then, she blushes, tenses, as though she’d forgotten and then suddenly remembered what happened.

Laura is watching us. She knows there is something I’m not telling her. She’d asked what was wrong before we came out. I told her it was a problem at work, and that seemed to pacify her, but I feel her eyes on us, looking for evidence of something that isn’t there.

After I’d walked in on Amy entertaining her friend, she’d come to our house. She would normally have come around to the back door but she rang the bell, perhaps trying to make a point. Maybe she meant to explain, or, more likely, to ask me not to say anything to Martin, but she did neither. Instead, she made an embarrassed and vague apology as though, in a muddled moment, she had forgotten to offer me a coffee. Seeing her off-balance like that was disorientating. She’d become a different person, diminished somehow.

In turn, I found myself bumbling out my own apology. ‘I didn’t mean to… burst in… I saw the door open and thought…’

As she was leaving, she stopped me closing the door behind her and said, ‘Why did you come? What did you want?’

I didn’t know how to answer. When I didn’t reply, she walked away and I closed the door quietly behind her.

Amy pulls away from me to light a cigarette, then rubs her shoulders. ‘Let’s go back indoors, it’s getting chilly.’

We move inside. In the lounge, the curve of their nouveau table lamp—an expensive fake—reflects in an arc across the windowpane giving the illusion that the night is pushing against the glass, distorting it. Maybe it’s the gin and I’m losing focus.

We talk and listen to records. It feels like every record Martin plays is from our college days—like he’s on some big fucking nostalgia trip, and it makes me think too much about the years since then, wondering if there was something I’d missed along the way. I miss the days when we were stupid. When we could sit around and have earnest conversations about UFOs, or if Atlantis really existed, what the best superpower would be, or if Plato could beat Nietzsche in a fight. I miss the days when we could talk about music or films without having to say something sophisticated or sarcastic. We can’t even talk about serious things seriously anymore.

Then, Martin and Laura have gone. I hear them next door in his study, and I vaguely recall something about a book he’s promised to lend her. In the chair opposite me, Amy seems bored, or irritated. I look at her until it feels like I’m staring, and I force myself to look away, but I needn’t have bothered, she’s avoiding my gaze. I feel sorry for her, really. It’s all a bit pathetic. She always seemed heroically larger-than-life, but the invulnerability that surrounded her is gone. The record finishes and we sit in silence for a moment before she gets up and leaves the room.  

I need air. I push myself up from my seat and go back out to the patio, slumping against the door frame and peering out into the garden. As I take a mouthful of lukewarm gin, from somewhere in the house, I hear Laura and Martin’s voices. He says something I can’t make out, and she giggles in a way I haven’t heard in a long time. Above me, the security light comes on, flooding the top of the garden with its pale light, illuminating the ghostly forms of garden furniture—glasses on the table, an ashtray on the ground beside a chair, uneaten bread in a wooden bowl, already damp with dew—as though I’ve frightened the revellers away and they’re hiding just beyond the light, waiting for the protection of darkness before they return.

oOo

David Frankel’s short stories have been shortlisted in numerous competitions including The Bristol Prize, The Bridport Prize, The Society of Authors’ ALCS Tom-Gallon Trust Award, and the Fish Memoir Prize. In 2019 he was longlisted for BBC Short Story Award. His work has been widely published in journals and anthologies and as chapbooks by Nightjar Press and Salo Press. His short story collection,